README.md, before:

# BOUT++

<!---Build nice shields at shields.io-->
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/boutproject/BOUT-dev.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/boutproject/BOUT-dev)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL-blue.svg)](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL-blue.svg)
[![py3comp](https://img.shields.io/badge/py3-compatible-brightgreen.svg)](https://img.shields.io/badge/py3-compatible-brightgreen.svg)

```
.______     ______    __    __  .___________.
|   _  \   /  __  \  |  |  |  | |           |  _     _
|  |_)  | |  |  |  | |  |  |  | `---|  |----`_| |_ _| |_
|   _  <  |  |  |  | |  |  |  |     |  |    |_   _|_   _|
|  |_)  | |  `--'  | |  `--'  |     |  |      |_|   |_|
|______/   \______/   \______/      |__|
```

BOUT++ is a framework for writing fluid and plasma simulations in
curvilinear geometry. It is intended to be quite modular, with a
variety of numerical methods and time-integration solvers
available. BOUT++ is primarily designed and tested with reduced plasma
fluid models in mind, but it can evolve any number of equations, with
equations appearing in a readable form.

Jointly developed by University of York (UK), LLNL, CCFE, DCU, DTU,
and other international partners.


Homepage found at [http://boutproject.github.io/](http://boutproject.github.io/)

## Table of Contents
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Usage and installation](#usage-and-installation)
* [Overview of files](#overview-of-files)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [Terms of use](#terms-of-use)
* [License](#license)

## Requirements

BOUT++ needs the following:

* A C++11 compiler
* MPI
* FFTW3
* Either NetCDF or HDF5

Note that some of the tests require NetCDF rather than HDF5

BOUT++ has the following optional dependencies:

* OpenMP
* PETSc
* SLEPc
* ARKODE
* IDA
* CVODE
* MUMPS
* LAPACK
* Score-p (for performance diagnostics)

## Usage and installation
Please see the [users manual](http://bout-dev.readthedocs.io)

## Overview of files

This directory contains

* **bin**                   Files for setting the BOUT++ configuration
* **examples**              Example models and test codes
* **externalpackages**      External packages needed for installing BOUT++
* **include**               Header files used in BOUT++
* **manual**                Manuals and documentation (also [doxygen](http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/) documentation)
* **src**                   The main code directory
* **CITATION**              Contains the paper citation for BOUT++
* **LICENSE**               LGPL license
* **LICENSE.GPL**           GPL license
* **tools**                 Tools for helping with analysis, mesh generation, and data managment

  * **archiving**               Routines for managing input/output files e.g. compressing data, converting formats, and managing runs
  * **cyl_and_helimak_grids**   IDL codes for generating cylindrical and helimak grids
  * **eigensolver**             Matlab routines for solving eigenmodes
  * **idllib**                  Analysis codes in IDL. Add this to your IDL_PATH environment variable
  * **line_tracing**            IDL routines for line tracing of field lines
  * **line_tracing_v2**         Newer version of the IDL routines for line tracing of field lines
  * **mathematicalib**          Library for post processing using Mathematica
  * **matlablib**               Library for post processing using MATLAB
  * **numlib**                  Numerical IDL routines
  * **octave**                  Routines for post processing using octave
  * **plasmalib**               IDL routines for calculation of plasma parameters
  * **pdb2idl**                 Library to read Portable Data Binary (PDB) files into IDL
  * **pylib**                   Analysis codes in Python

    * **boutdata**        Routines to simplify accessing BOUT++ output
    * **boututils**       Some useful routines for accessing and plotting data
    * **bout_runners**    A python wrapper to submit several runs at once (either on a normal computer, or through a PBS system)
    * **post_bout**       Routines for post processing in BOUT++

  * **slab**              IDL routine for grid generation of a slab
  * **tokamak_grids**     Code to generate input grids for tokamak equilibria

    * **gridgen**         Grid generator in IDL. Hypnotoad GUI for converting G-EQDSK files into a flux-aligned orthogonal grid.
    * **elite**           Convert ELITE .eqin files into an intermediate binary file
    * **gato**            Convert DSKGATO files into intermediate binary format
    * **all**             Convert the intermediate binary file into BOUT++ input grid
    * **coils**           Routines for calculating the field due to external RMP coils and adding to existing equilibria
    * **cyclone**         Generate cyclone test cases (concentric circle "equilibrium" for local flux-surface calculations)
    * **py_gridgen**      Translation" into python of the corresponding IDL routines in the folder gridgen
    * **shifted_circle**  Produce shifted cirle equilibria input grids


## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

## Terms of use

BOUT++ is released under the LGPL, but since BOUT++ is a
scientific code we also ask that you show professional courtesy
when using this code:

1. Since you are benefiting from work on BOUT++, we ask that you
   submit any improvements you make to the code to us by emailing
   Ben Dudson at bd512@york.ac.uk
2. If you use BOUT++ results in a paper or professional publication,
   we ask that you send your results to one of the BOUT++ authors
   first so that we can check them. It is understood that in most cases
   if one or more of the BOUT++ team are involved in preparing results
   then they should appear as co-authors.
3. Publications or figures made with the BOUT++ code should acknowledge the
   BOUT++ code by citing B.Dudson et. al. Comp.Phys.Comm 2009 and/or
   other BOUT++ papers. See the file CITATION for details.



## License
Copyright 2010 B.D.Dudson, S.Farley, M.V.Umansky, X.Q.Xu

BOUT++ is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

BOUT++ is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.

A copy of the LGPL license is in [LICENSE](LICENSE). Since this is based
on (and refers to) the GPL, this is included in [LICENSE.GPL](LICENSE.GPL).

Commit message:

Include some example equations in README

README.md, after:

# BOUT++

<!---Build nice shields at shields.io-->
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/boutproject/BOUT-dev.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/boutproject/BOUT-dev)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL-blue.svg)](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL-blue.svg)
[![py3comp](https://img.shields.io/badge/py3-compatible-brightgreen.svg)](https://img.shields.io/badge/py3-compatible-brightgreen.svg)

```
.______     ______    __    __  .___________.
|   _  \   /  __  \  |  |  |  | |           |  _     _
|  |_)  | |  |  |  | |  |  |  | `---|  |----`_| |_ _| |_
|   _  <  |  |  |  | |  |  |  |     |  |    |_   _|_   _|
|  |_)  | |  `--'  | |  `--'  |     |  |      |_|   |_|
|______/   \______/   \______/      |__|
```

BOUT++ is a framework for writing fluid and plasma simulations in
curvilinear geometry. It is intended to be quite modular, with a
variety of numerical methods and time-integration solvers
available. BOUT++ is primarily designed and tested with reduced plasma
fluid models in mind, but it can evolve any number of equations, with
equations appearing in a readable form.

For example, the following set of equations for magnetohydrodynamics
(MHD):

![ddt_rho](http://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Cfrac%7B%5Cpartial%20%5Crho%7D%7B%5Cpartial%20t%7D%20%3D%20-%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D%5Ccdot%5Cnabla%5Crho%20-%20%5Crho%5Cnabla%5Ccdot%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D)  
![ddt_p](http://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Cfrac%7B%5Cpartial%20p%7D%7B%5Cpartial%20t%7D%20%3D%20-%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D%5Ccdot%5Cnabla%20p%20-%20%5Cgamma%20p%5Cnabla%5Ccdot%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D)  
![ddt_v](http://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Cfrac%7B%5Cpartial%20%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D%7D%7B%5Cpartial%20t%7D%20%3D%20-%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D%5Ccdot%5Cnabla%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D%20&plus;%20%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7B%5Crho%7D%28-%5Cnabla%20p%20&plus;%20%28%5Cnabla%5Ctimes%5Cmathbf%7BB%7D%29%5Ctimes%5Cmathbf%7BB%7D%29)  
![ddt_B](http://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%7B%7B%5Cfrac%7B%5Cpartial%20%5Cmathbf%7BB%7D%7D%7B%5Cpartial%20t%7D%7D%7D%20%3D%20%5Cnabla%5Ctimes%28%5Cmathbf%7Bv%7D%5Ctimes%5Cmathbf%7BB%7D%29)  

can be written simply as:

```cpp
ddt(rho) = -V_dot_Grad(v, rho) - rho*Div(v);
ddt(p)   = -V_dot_Grad(v, p) - g*p*Div(v);
ddt(v)   = -V_dot_Grad(v, v) + ((Curl(B)^B) - Grad(p))/rho;
ddt(B)   = Curl(v^B);
```

The full code for this example can be found in the [orszag-tang
example](examples/orszag-tang/mhd.cxx).

Jointly developed by University of York (UK), LLNL, CCFE, DCU, DTU,
and other international partners.


Homepage found at [http://boutproject.github.io/](http://boutproject.github.io/)

## Table of Contents
* [Requirements](#requirements)
* [Usage and installation](#usage-and-installation)
* [Overview of files](#overview-of-files)
* [Contributing](#contributing)
* [Terms of use](#terms-of-use)
* [License](#license)

## Requirements

BOUT++ needs the following:

* A C++11 compiler
* MPI
* FFTW3
* Either NetCDF or HDF5

Note that some of the tests require NetCDF rather than HDF5

BOUT++ has the following optional dependencies:

* OpenMP
* PETSc
* SLEPc
* ARKODE
* IDA
* CVODE
* MUMPS
* LAPACK
* Score-p (for performance diagnostics)

## Usage and installation
Please see the [users manual](http://bout-dev.readthedocs.io)

## Overview of files

This directory contains

* **bin**                   Files for setting the BOUT++ configuration
* **examples**              Example models and test codes
* **externalpackages**      External packages needed for installing BOUT++
* **include**               Header files used in BOUT++
* **manual**                Manuals and documentation (also [doxygen](http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/) documentation)
* **src**                   The main code directory
* **CITATION**              Contains the paper citation for BOUT++
* **LICENSE**               LGPL license
* **LICENSE.GPL**           GPL license
* **tools**                 Tools for helping with analysis, mesh generation, and data managment

  * **archiving**               Routines for managing input/output files e.g. compressing data, converting formats, and managing runs
  * **cyl_and_helimak_grids**   IDL codes for generating cylindrical and helimak grids
  * **eigensolver**             Matlab routines for solving eigenmodes
  * **idllib**                  Analysis codes in IDL. Add this to your IDL_PATH environment variable
  * **line_tracing**            IDL routines for line tracing of field lines
  * **line_tracing_v2**         Newer version of the IDL routines for line tracing of field lines
  * **mathematicalib**          Library for post processing using Mathematica
  * **matlablib**               Library for post processing using MATLAB
  * **numlib**                  Numerical IDL routines
  * **octave**                  Routines for post processing using octave
  * **plasmalib**               IDL routines for calculation of plasma parameters
  * **pdb2idl**                 Library to read Portable Data Binary (PDB) files into IDL
  * **pylib**                   Analysis codes in Python

    * **boutdata**        Routines to simplify accessing BOUT++ output
    * **boututils**       Some useful routines for accessing and plotting data
    * **bout_runners**    A python wrapper to submit several runs at once (either on a normal computer, or through a PBS system)
    * **post_bout**       Routines for post processing in BOUT++

  * **slab**              IDL routine for grid generation of a slab
  * **tokamak_grids**     Code to generate input grids for tokamak equilibria

    * **gridgen**         Grid generator in IDL. Hypnotoad GUI for converting G-EQDSK files into a flux-aligned orthogonal grid.
    * **elite**           Convert ELITE .eqin files into an intermediate binary file
    * **gato**            Convert DSKGATO files into intermediate binary format
    * **all**             Convert the intermediate binary file into BOUT++ input grid
    * **coils**           Routines for calculating the field due to external RMP coils and adding to existing equilibria
    * **cyclone**         Generate cyclone test cases (concentric circle "equilibrium" for local flux-surface calculations)
    * **py_gridgen**      Translation" into python of the corresponding IDL routines in the folder gridgen
    * **shifted_circle**  Produce shifted cirle equilibria input grids


## Contributing

See [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

## Terms of use

BOUT++ is released under the LGPL, but since BOUT++ is a
scientific code we also ask that you show professional courtesy
when using this code:

1. Since you are benefiting from work on BOUT++, we ask that you
   submit any improvements you make to the code to us by emailing
   Ben Dudson at bd512@york.ac.uk
2. If you use BOUT++ results in a paper or professional publication,
   we ask that you send your results to one of the BOUT++ authors
   first so that we can check them. It is understood that in most cases
   if one or more of the BOUT++ team are involved in preparing results
   then they should appear as co-authors.
3. Publications or figures made with the BOUT++ code should acknowledge the
   BOUT++ code by citing B.Dudson et. al. Comp.Phys.Comm 2009 and/or
   other BOUT++ papers. See the file CITATION for details.



## License
Copyright 2010 B.D.Dudson, S.Farley, M.V.Umansky, X.Q.Xu

BOUT++ is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

BOUT++ is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.

A copy of the LGPL license is in [LICENSE](LICENSE). Since this is based
on (and refers to) the GPL, this is included in [LICENSE.GPL](LICENSE.GPL).
