.. _sec-equations:

BOUT++ physics models
=====================

Once you have tried some example codes, and generally got the hang of
running BOUT++ and analysing the results, there will probably come a
time when you want to change the equations being solved. This section
demonstrates how a BOUT++ physics model is put together. It assumes
you have a working knowledge of C or C++, but you don’t need to be an
expert - most of the messy code is hidden away from the physics
model. There are several good books on C and C++, but I’d recommend
online tutorials over books because there are a lot more of them,
they’re quicker to scan through, and they’re cheaper.

Many of the examples which come with BOUT++ are physics models, and
can be used as a starting point. Some relatively simple examples are
``blob2d`` (2D plasma filament/blob propagation),
``hasegawa-wakatani`` (2D turbulence), ``finite-volume/fluid`` (1D
compressible fluid) and ``gas-compress`` (up to 3D compressible
fluid). Some of the integrated tests (under ``tests/integrated``) use
either physics models (e.g. ``test-delp2`` and
``test-drift-instability``), or define their own ``main`` function
(e.g. ``test-io`` and ``test-cyclic``).

.. _sec-heat-conduction-model:

Heat conduction
---------------

The ``conduction`` example solves 1D heat conduction

.. math::

   \frac{\partial T}{\partial t} = \nabla_{||}(\chi\partial_{||} T)

The source code to solve this is in ``conduction.cxx``, which we show here:

.. literalinclude:: /../../examples/conduction/conduction.cxx
   :lines: 6-
   :lineno-match:
   :name: conduction-cxx

Let's go through it line-by-line. First, we include the header that
defines the `PhysicsModel` class::

  #include <bout/physicsmodel.hxx>

This also brings in the header files that we need for the rest of the
code. Next, we need to define a new class, ``Conduction``, that
inherits from `PhysicsModel` (line 8)::

  class Conduction : public PhysicsModel {

The `PhysicsModel` contains both the physical variables we want to
evolve, like the temperature::

  Field3D T; // Evolving temperature equation only

as well as any physical or numerical coefficients. In this case, we
only have the parallel conduction coefficient, ``chi``::

  BoutReal chi; // Parallel conduction coefficient

A `Field3D` represents a 3D scalar quantity, while a `BoutReal`
represents a single number. See the later section on
:ref:`sec-variables` for more information.

After declaring our model variables, we need to define two functions:
an initialisation function, ``init``, that is called to set up the
simulation and specify which variables are evolving in time; and a
"right-hand side" function, ``rhs``, that calculates the time
derivatives of our evolving variables. These are defined in lines 18
and 21 respectively above::

     int init(bool restarting) override {
     ...
     }
     int rhs(BoutReal time) override {
     ...
     }

`PhysicsModel::init` takes as input a ``bool`` (``true`` or ``false``)
that tells it whether or not the model is being restarted, which can
be useful if something only needs to be done once before the
simulation starts properly. The simulation (physical) time is passed
to `PhyiscsModel::rhs` as a `BoutReal`.

The ``override`` keyword is just to let the compiler know we're
overriding a method in the base class and is not important to
understand.

Initialisation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During initialisation (the ``init`` function), the conduction example
first reads an option (lines 21 and 24) from the input settings file
(``data/BOUT.inp`` by default)::

    auto options = Options::root()["conduction"];

    OPTION(options, chi, 1.0);

This first gets a section called "conduction", then requests an option
called "chi" inside this section. If this setting is not found, then
the default value of 1.0 will be used. To set this value the BOUT.inp
file contains:

.. code-block:: bash

    [conduction]
    chi = 1.0

which defines a section called "conduction", and within that section a
variable called "chi". This value can also be overridden by specifying
the setting on the command line:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ ./conduction conduction:chi=2

where ``conduction:chi`` means the variable "chi" in the section
"conduction". When this option is read, a message is printed to the
BOUT.log files, giving the value used and the source of that value:

.. code-block:: bash

    Option conduction:chi = 1 (data/BOUT.inp)

For more information on options and input files, see
:ref:`sec-options`, as well as the documentation for the `Options`
class.

After reading the chi option, the ``init`` method then specifies which
variables to evolve using the `SOLVE_FOR` macro::

    // Tell BOUT++ to solve T
    SOLVE_FOR(T);

This tells the BOUT++ time integration solver to set the variable
``T`` using values from the input settings. It looks in a section with
the same name as the variable (``T`` here) for variables "scale" and
"function":

.. code-block:: bash

    [T] # Settings for the T variable

    scale = 1.0  # Size of the initial perturbation
    function = gauss(y-pi, 0.2)  # The form of the initial perturbation. y from 0 to 2*pi

The function is evaluated using expressions which can involve x,y and
z coordinates. More details are given in section
:ref:`sec-init-time-evolved-vars`.

Finally an error code is returned, here 0 indicates no error. If
``init`` returns non-zero then the simulation will stop.

Time evolution
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During time evolution, the time integration method (ODE integrator)
calculates the system state (here ``T``) at a give time. It then calls
the `PhysicsModel::rhs` function, which should calculate the time
derivative of all the evolving variables. In this case the job of the
``rhs`` function is to calculate ``ddt(T)``, the **partial
derivative** of the variable ``T`` with respect to time, given the value
of ``T``:

 .. math::

   \frac{\partial T}{\partial t} = \nabla_{||}(\chi\partial_{||} T)

The first thing the ``rhs`` function function does is communicate the
guard (halo) cells using `Mesh::communicate` on line 33::

    mesh->communicate(T);

This is because BOUT++ does not (generally) do communications, but
leaves it up to the user to decide when the most efficient or
convenient time to do them is. Before we can take derivatives of a
variable (here ``T``), the values of the function must be known in the
boundaries and guard cells, which requires communication between
processors. By default the values in the guard cells are set to
``NaN``, so if they are accidentally used without first communicating
then the code should crash fairly quickly with a non-finite number
error.

Once the guard cells have been communicated, we calculate the right
hand side (RHS) of the equation above (line 35)::

    ddt(T) = Div_par_K_Grad_par(chi, T);

The function `Div_par_K_Grad_par` is a function in the BOUT++ library
which calculates the divergence in the parallel (y) direction of a
constant multiplied by the gradient of a function in the parallel
direction.

As with the ``init`` code, a non-zero return value indicates an error
and will stop the simulation.

Running the model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The very last thing we need to do in our physics model is to define a
``main`` function. Here, we do it with the `BOUTMAIN` macro::

  BOUTMAIN(Conduction);

You can define your own ``main()`` function, but for most cases this
is enough. The macro expands to something like::

      int main(int argc, char **argv) {
        BoutInitialise(argc, argv); // Initialise BOUT++

        Conduction *model = new Conduction(); // Create a model

        Solver *solver = Solver::create(); // Create a solver
        solver->setModel(model); // Specify the model to solve
        solver->addMonitor(bout_monitor); // Monitor the solver

        solver->solve(); // Run the solver

        delete model;
        delete solver;
        BoutFinalise(); // Finished with BOUT++
        return 0;
      }

This initialises the main BOUT++ library, creates the `PhysicsModel`
and `Solver`, runs the solver, and finally cleans up the model, solver
and library.


Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
--------------------------

When going through this section, it may help to refer to the finished
code, which is given in the file ``mhd.cxx`` in the BOUT++ examples
directory under ``orszag-tang``. The equations to be solved are:

.. math::

   {{\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t}}} =& -\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla\rho - \rho\nabla\cdot\mathbf{v} \\
       {{\frac{\partial p}{\partial t}}} =& -\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla p - \gamma p\nabla\cdot\mathbf{v} \\
       {{\frac{\partial \mathbf{v}}{\partial t}}} =& -\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla\mathbf{v} +
       \frac{1}{\rho}(-\nabla p +
       (\nabla\times\mathbf{B})\times\mathbf{B}) \\ {{\frac{\partial \mathbf{B}}{\partial t}}} =&
       \nabla\times(\mathbf{v}\times\mathbf{B})

As in the :ref:`heat conduction example <sec-heat-conduction-model>`,
a class is created which inherits from `PhysicsModel` and defines
``init`` and ``rhs`` functions::

    class MHD : public PhysicsModel {
      private:
      int init(bool restarting) override {
        ...
      }
      int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
        ...
      }
    };


The ``init`` function is called once at the start of the simulation,
and should set up the problem, specifying which variables are to be
evolved.  The argument ``restarting`` is false the first time a
problem is run, and true if loading the state from a restart file.

The ``rhs`` function is called every time-step, and should calculate
the time-derivatives for a given state. In both cases returning
non-zero tells BOUT++ that an error occurred.

.. _sec-variables:

Variables
~~~~~~~~~

We need to define the variables to evolve as member variables (so they
can be used in ``init`` and ``rhs``).

For ideal MHD, we need two 3D scalar fields density :math:`\rho` and
pressure :math:`p`, and two 3D vector fields velocity :math:`v`, and
magnetic field :math:`B`::

    class MHD : public PhysicsModel {
      private:
      Field3D rho, p; // 3D scalar fields
      Vector3D v, B;  // 3D vector fields
      ...
    };

Scalar and vector fields behave much as you would expect: `Field3D`
objects can be added, subtracted, multiplied and divided, so the
following examples are all valid operations::

    Field3D a, b, c;
    BoutReal r;

    a = b + c; a = b - c;
    a = b * c; a = r * b;
    a = b / c; a = b / r; a = r / b;

Similarly, vector objects can be added/subtracted from each other,
multiplied/divided by scalar fields and real numbers, for example::

    Vector3D a, b, c;
    Field3D f;
    BoutReal r;

    a = b + c; a = b - c;
    a = b * f; a = b * r;
    a = b / f; a = b / r;

In addition the dot and cross products are represented by ``*`` and
:math:`\wedge` \ symbols::

    Vector3D a, b, c;
    Field3D f;

    f = a * b // Dot-product
    a = b ^ c // Cross-product

For both scalar and vector field operations, so long as the result of an
operation is of the correct type, the usual C/C++ shorthand notation can
be used::

    Field3D a, b;
    Vector3D v, w;

    a += b; v *= a; v -= w; v ^= w; // valid
    v *= w; // NOT valid: result of dot-product is a scalar

**Note**: The operator precedence for :math:`\wedge` is lower than
``+``, ``*`` and ``/`` so it is recommended to surround ``a ^ b`` with
braces.

Evolution equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At this point we can tell BOUT++ which variables to evolve, and where
the state and time-derivatives will be stored. This is done using the
`bout_solve(variable, name) <PhysicsModel::bout_solve>` function in
your physics model `init <PhysicsModel::init>`::

    int init(bool restarting) {
      bout_solve(rho, "density");
      bout_solve(p,   "pressure");
      v.covariant = true; // evolve covariant components
      bout_solve(v,   "v");
      B.covariant = false; // evolve contravariant components
      bout_solve(B,   "B");

      return 0;
    }

The name given to this function will be used in the output and restart
data files. These will be automatically read and written depending on
input options (see :ref:`sec-options`). Input options based on these
names are also used to initialise the variables.

If the name of the variable in the output file is the same as the
variable name, you can use a shorthand macro. In this case, we could use
this shorthand for ``v`` and ``B``::

    SOLVE_FOR(v);
    SOLVE_FOR(B);

To make this even shorter, multiple fields can be passed to
``SOLVE_FOR`` (up to 10 at the time of writing). We can also use
macros `SOLVE_FOR2`, `SOLVE_FOR3`, ..., `SOLVE_FOR6` which are used in
many models. Our initialisation code becomes::

    int init(bool restarting) override {
      ...
      bout_solve(rho, "density");
      bout_solve(p,   "pressure");
      v.covariant = true; // evolve covariant components
      B.covariant = false; // evolve contravariant components
      SOLVE_FOR(v, B);
      ...
      return 0;
    }

Vector quantities can be stored in either covariant or contravariant
form. The value of the `Vector3D::covariant` property when
`PhysicsModel::bout_solve` (or `SOLVE_FOR`) is called is the form
which is evolved in time and saved to the output file.

The equations to be solved can now be written in the ``rhs``
function. The value passed to the function (``BoutReal t``) is the
simulation time - only needed if your equations contain time-dependent
sources or similar terms. To refer to the time-derivative of a
variable ``var``, use ``ddt(var)``. The ideal MHD equations can be
written as::

    int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
      ddt(rho) = -V_dot_Grad(v, rho) - rho*Div(v);
      ddt(p) = -V_dot_Grad(v, p) - g*p*Div(v);
      ddt(v) = -V_dot_Grad(v, v) + ( (Curl(B)^B) - Grad(p) ) / rho;
      ddt(B) = Curl(v^B);
    }

Where the differential operators `vector = Grad(scalar) <Grad>`,
`scalar = Div(vector) <Div>`, and `vector = Curl(vector) <Curl>` are
used. For the density and pressure equations, the
:math:`\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla\rho` term could be written as
``v*Grad(rho)``, but this would then use central differencing in the
Grad operator. Instead, the function `V_dot_Grad` uses upwinding
methods for these advection terms. In addition, the `Grad` function
will not operate on vector objects (since result is neither scalar nor
vector), so the :math:`\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla\mathbf{v}` term CANNOT be
written as ``v*Grad(v)``.

.. _sec-inputopts:

Input options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note that in the above equations the extra parameter ``g`` has been
used for the ratio of specific heats. To enable this to be set in the
input options file (see :ref:`sec-options`), we use the `Options`
object in the initialisation function::


    class MHD : public PhysicsModel {
      private:
      BoutReal gamma;

      int init(bool restarting) override {
        auto globalOptions = Options::root();
        auto options = globalOptions["mhd"];

        OPTION(options, g, 5.0 / 3.0);
        ...

This specifies that an option called “g” in a section called “mhd”
should be put into the variable ``g``. If the option could not be
found, or was of the wrong type, the variable should be set to a
default value of :math:`5/3`. The value used will be printed to the
output file, so if ``g`` is not set in the input file the following
line will appear::

          Option mhd:g = 1.66667 (default)

This function can be used to get integers and booleans. To get
strings, there is the function (``char* options.getString(section,
name)``. To separate options specific to the physics model, these
options should be put in a separate section, for example here the
“mhd” section has been specified.

Most of the time, the name of the variable (e.g. ``g``) will be the
same as the identifier in the options file (“g”). In this case, there
is the macro::

    OPTION(options, g, 5.0/3.0);

which is equivalent to::
  
    g = options["g"].withDefault( 5.0/3.0 );

See :ref:`sec-options` for more details of how to use the input
options.

Communication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you plan to run BOUT++ on more than one processor, any operations
involving derivatives will require knowledge of data stored on other
processors. To handle the necessary parallel communication, there is
the `mesh->communicate <Mesh::communicate>` function. This takes care
of where the data needs to go to/from, and only needs to be told which
variables to transfer.

If you only need to communicate a small number (up to 5 currently) of
variables then just call the `Mesh::communicate` function directly.
For the MHD code, we need to communicate the variables ``rho,p,v,B``
at the beginning of the `PhysicsModel::rhs` function before any
derivatives are calculated::

    int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
      mesh->communicate(rho, p, v, B);

If you need to communicate lots of variables, or want to change at
run-time which variables are evolved (e.g. depending on input
options), then you can create a group of variables and communicate
them later. To do this, first create a `FieldGroup` object , in this
case called ``comms`` , then use the add method. This method does no
communication, but records which variables to transfer when the
communication is done later::

    class MHD : public PhysicsModel {
      private:
      FieldGroup comms;

      int init(bool restarting) override {
        ...
        comms.add(rho);
        comms.add(p);
        comms.add(v);
        comms.add(B);
        ...

The `comms.add() <FieldGroup::add>` routine can be given any number of
variables at once (there’s no practical limit on the total number of
variables which are added to a `FieldGroup` ), so this can be
shortened to::

     comms.add(rho, p, v, B);

To perform the actual communication, call the `mesh->communicate
<Mesh::communicate>` function with the group. In this case we need to
communicate all these variables before performing any calculations, so
call this function at the start of the ``rhs`` routine::

    int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
      mesh->communicate(comms);
      ...

In many situations there may be several groups of variables which can
be communicated at different times. The function ``mesh->communicate``
consists of a call to `Mesh::send` followed by `Mesh::wait` which can
be done separately to interleave calculations and communications.
This will speed up the code if parallel communication bandwidth is a
problem for your simulation.

In our MHD example, the calculation of ``ddt(rho)`` and ``ddt(p)``
does not require ``B``, so we could first communicate ``rho``, ``p``,
and ``v``, send ``B`` and do some calculations whilst communications
are performed::

    int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
      mesh->communicate(rho, p, v); // sends and receives rho, p and v
      comm_handle ch = mesh->send(B);// only send B

      ddt(rho) = ...
      ddt(p) = ...

      mesh->wait(ch); // now wait for B to arrive

      ddt(v) = ...
      ddt(B) = ...

      return 0;
    }

This scheme is not used in ``mhd.cxx``, partly for clarity, and partly
because currently communications are not a significant bottleneck (too
much inefficiency elsewhere!).

When a differential is calculated, points on neighbouring cells are
assumed to be in the guard cells. There is no way to calculate the
result of the differential in the guard cells, and so after every
differential operator the values in the guard cells are invalid.
Therefore, if you take the output of one differential operator and use
it as input to another differential operator, you must perform
communications (and set boundary conditions) first. See
:ref:`sec-diffops`.

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finding where bugs have occurred in a (fairly large) parallel code is
a difficult problem. This is more of a concern for developers of
BOUT++ (see the developers manual), but it is still useful for the
user to be able to hunt down bug in their own code, or help narrow
down where a bug could be occurring.

If you have a bug which is easily reproduceable i.e. it occurs almost
immediately every time you run the code, then the easiest way to hunt
down the bug is to insert lots of ``output.write`` statements (see
:ref:`sec-logging`). Things get harder when a bug only occurs after a
long time of running, and/or only occasionally. For this type of
problem, a useful tool can be the message stack. An easy way to use
this message stack is to use the `TRACE` macro::

    {
          TRACE("Some message here"); // message pushed

    } // Scope ends, message popped

This will push the message, then pop the message when the current
scope ends (except when an exception occurs).  The error message will
also have the file name and line number appended, to help find where
an error occurred. The run-time overhead of this should be small, but
can be removed entirely if the compile-time flag ``-DCHECK`` is not
defined or set to ``0``. This turns off checking, and ``TRACE``
becomes an empty macro.  It is possible to use standard ``printf``
like formatting with the trace macro, for example::

    {
          TRACE("The value of i is %d and this is an arbitrary %s", i, "string"); // message pushed
    } // Scope ends, message popped

In the ``mhd.cxx`` example each part of the ``rhs`` function is
trace'd. If an error occurs then at least the equation where it
happened will be printed::

    {
      TRACE("ddt(rho)");
      ddt(rho) = -V_dot_Grad(v, rho) - rho*Div(v);
    }


Boundary conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All evolving variables have boundary conditions applied automatically
before the ``rhs`` function is called (or afterwards if the boundaries
are being evolved in time). Which condition is applied depends on the
options file settings (see :ref:`sec-bndryopts`). If you want to
disable this and apply your own boundary conditions then set boundary
condition to ``none`` in the ``BOUT.inp`` options file.

In addition to evolving variables, it’s sometimes necessary to impose
boundary conditions on other quantities which are not explicitly
evolved.

The simplest way to set a boundary condition is to specify it as text,
so to apply a Dirichlet boundary condition::

      Field3D var;
      ...
      var.applyBoundary("dirichlet");

The format is exactly the same as in the options file. Each time this
is called it must parse the text, create and destroy boundary
objects. To avoid this overhead and have different boundary conditions
for each region, it’s better to set the boundary conditions you want
to use first in ``init``, then just apply them every time::

    class MHD : public PhysicsModel {
      Field3D var;

      int init(bool restarting) override {
        ...
        var.setBoundary("myVar");
        ...
      }

      int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
        ...
        var.applyBoundary();
        ...
      }
    }

This will look in the options file for a section called ``[myvar]``
(upper or lower case doesn’t matter) in the same way that evolving
variables are handled. In fact this is precisely what is done: inside
`PhysicsModel::bout_solve` (or `SOLVE_FOR`) the `Field3D::setBoundary`
method is called, and then after ``rhs`` the `Field3D::applyBoundary`
method is called on each evolving variable. This method also gives you
the flexibility to apply different boundary conditions on different
boundary regions (e.g.  radial boundaries and target plates); the
first method just applies the same boundary condition to all
boundaries.

Another way to set the boundaries is to copy them from another variable::

    Field3D a, b;
    ...
    a.setBoundaryTo(b); // Copy b's boundaries into a
    ...

Note that this will copy the value at the boundary, which is half-way between
mesh points. This is not the same as copying the guard cells from
field ``b`` to field ``a``. The value at the boundary cell is
calculated using second-order central difference.  For example if
there is one boundary cell, so that ``a(0,y,z)`` is the boundary cell,
and ``a(1,y,z)`` is in the domain, then the boundary would be set so that::

    a(0,y,z) + a(1,y,z) = b(0,y,z) + b(1,y,z)

rearranged as::

    a(0,y,z) = - a(1,y,z) + b(0,y,z) + b(1,y,z)
    
To copy the boundary cells (and communication guard cells), iterate
over them::

    BOUT_FOR(i, a.getRegion("RGN_GUARDS")) {
      a[i] = b[i];
    }
    
See :ref:`sec-iterating` for more details on iterating over custom regions.

.. _sec-custom-bc:

Custom boundary conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The boundary conditions supplied with the BOUT++ library cover the
most common situations, but cannot cover all of them. If the boundary
condition you need isn’t available, then it’s quite straightforward to
write your own. First you need to make sure that your boundary
condition isn’t going to be overwritten. To do this, set the boundary
condition to “none” in the BOUT.inp options file, and BOUT++ will
leave that boundary alone. For example::

    [P]
    bndry_all = dirichlet
    bndry_xin = none
    bndry_xout = none

would set all boundaries for the variable “P” to zero value, except for
the X inner and outer boundaries which will be left alone for you to
modify.

To set an X boundary condition, it’s necessary to test if the processor
is at the left boundary (first in X), or right boundary (last in X).
Note that it might be both if ``NXPE = 1``, or neither if ``NXPE > 2``.

::

      Field3D f;
      ...
      if(mesh->firstX()) {
        // At the left of the X domain
        // set f[0:1][*][*] i.e. first two points in X, all Y and all Z
        for(int x=0; x < 2; x++)
          for(int y=0; y < mesh->LocalNy; y++)
            for(int z=0; z < mesh->LocalNz; z++) {
              f(x,y,z) = ...
            }
      }
      if(mesh->lastX()) {
        // At the right of the X domain
        // Set last two points in X
        for(int x=mesh->LocalNx-2; x < mesh->LocalNx; x++)
          for(int y=0; y < mesh->LocalNy; y++)
            for(int z=0; z < mesh->LocalNz; z++) {
              f(x,y,z) = ...
            }
      }

note the size of the local mesh including guard cells is given by
`Mesh::LocalNx`, `Mesh::LocalNy`, and `Mesh::LocalNz`. The functions
`Mesh::firstX` and `Mesh::lastX` return true only if the current
processor is on the left or right of the X domain respectively.

Setting custom Y boundaries is slightly more complicated than X
boundaries, because target or limiter plates could cover only part of
the domain. Rather than use a ``for`` loop to iterate over the points
in the boundary, we need to use a more general iterator::

      Field3D f;
      ...
      RangeIterator it = mesh->iterateBndryLowerY();
      for(it.first(); !it.isDone(); it++) {
        // it.ind contains the x index
        for(int y=2;y>=0;y--)  // Boundary width 3 points
          for(int z=0;z<mesh->LocalNz;z++) {
            ddt(f)(it.ind,y,z) = 0.;  // Set time-derivative to zero in boundary
          }
      }

This would set the time-derivative of ``f`` to zero in a boundary of
width 3 in Y (from 0 to 2 inclusive). In the same way
``mesh->iterateBndryUpperY()`` can be used to iterate over the upper
boundary::

      RangeIterator it = mesh->iterateBndryUpperY();
      for(it.first(); !it.isDone(); it++) {
        // it.ind contains the x index
        for(int y=mesh->LocalNy-3;y<mesh->LocalNy;y--)  // Boundary width 3 points
          for(int z=0;z<mesh->LocalNz;z++) {
            ddt(f)(it.ind,y,z) = 0.;  // Set time-derivative to zero in boundary
          }
      }

Initial profiles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Up to this point the code is evolving total density, pressure
etc. This has advantages for clarity, but has problems numerically:
For small perturbations, rounding error and tolerances in the
time-integration mean that linear dispersion relations are not
calculated correctly. The solution to this is to write all equations
in terms of an initial “background” quantity and a time-evolving
perturbation, for example :math:`\rho(t) \rightarrow \rho_0 +
\tilde{\rho}(t)`. For this reason, **the initialisation of all
variables passed to the `PhysicsModel::bout_solve` function is a
combination of small-amplitude gaussians and waves; the user is
expected to have performed this separation into background and
perturbed quantities.**

To read in a quantity from a grid file, there is the ``mesh->get``
function::

    Field2D Ni0; // Background density

    int init(bool restarting) override {
      ...
      mesh->get(Ni0, "Ni0");
      ...
    }

As with the input options, most of the time the name of the variable
in the physics code will be the same as the name in the grid file to
avoid confusion. In this case, you can just use::

    GRID_LOAD(Ni0);

which is equivalent to::

    mesh->get(Ni0, "Ni0");

(see `Mesh::get`).

Output variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BOUT++ always writes the evolving variables to file, but often it’s
useful to add other variables to the output. For convenience you might
want to write the normalised starting profiles or other non-evolving
values to file. For example::

      Field2D Ni0;
      ...
      GRID_LOAD(Ni0);
      dump.add(Ni0, "Ni0", 0);

where the ’0’ at the end means the variable should only be written to
file once at the start of the simulation. For convenience there are
some macros e.g.::

      SAVE_ONCE(Ni0);

is equivalent to::

      dump.add(Ni0, "Ni0", 0);

(see `Datafile::add`). In some situations you might also want to write
some data to a different file. To do this, create a `Datafile` object::

    Datafile mydata;

in ``init``, you then:

#. (optional) Initialise the file, passing it the options to use. If you
   skip this step, default (sane) options will be used. This just allows
   you to enable/disable, use parallel I/O, set whether files are opened
   and closed every time etc.::

       mydata = Datafile(Options::getRoot()->getSection("mydata"));

   which would use options in a section ``[mydata]`` in BOUT.inp

#. Open the file for writing::

       mydata.openw("mydata.nc")

   (see `Datafile::openw`). By default this only specifies the file
   name; actual opening of the file happens later when the data is
   written. If you are not using parallel I/O, the processor number is
   also inserted into the file name before the last “.”, so mydata.nc”
   becomes “mydata.0.nc”, “mydata.1.nc” etc. The file format used
   depends on the extension, so “.nc” will open NetCDF, and “.hdf5” or
   “.h5” an HDF5 file.

   (see e.g. src/fileio/datafile.cxx line 139, which calls
   src/fileio/dataformat.cxx line 23, which then calls the file format
   interface e.g. src/fileio/impls/netcdf/nc\_format.cxx line 172).

#. Add variables to the file ::

       // Not evolving. Every time the file is written, this will be overwritten
       mydata.add(variable, "name");
       // Evolving. Will output a sequence of values
       mydata.add(variable2, "name2", 1);

Whenever you want to write values to the file, for example in
``rhs`` or a monitor, just call::

    mydata.write();

(see `Datafile::write`). To collect the data afterwards, you can
specify the prefix to collect. In Python (see
:py:func:`~boutdata.collect.collect`)::

    >>> var = collect("name", prefix="mydata")

By default the prefix is “BOUT.dmp”.

Variable attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An experimental feature is the ability to add attributes to output
variables. Do this using with `Datafile::setAttribute`::

   dump.setAttribute(variable, attribute, value);

where ``variable`` is the name of the variable; ``attribute`` is the
name of the attribute, and ``value`` can be either a string or an
integer. For example::

   dump.setAttribute("Ni0", "units", "m^-3");

Reduced MHD
-----------

The MHD example presented previously covered some of the functions
available in BOUT++, which can be used for a wide variety of models.
There are however several other significant functions and classes
which are commonly used, which will be illustrated using the
``reconnect-2field`` example. This is solving equations for
:math:`A_{||}` and vorticity :math:`U`

.. math::

   {{\frac{\partial U}{\partial t}}} =& -\frac{1}{B}\mathbf{b}_0\times\nabla\phi\cdot\nabla U + B^2
       \nabla_{||}(j_{||} / B) \\ {{\frac{\partial A_{||}}{\partial t}}} =&
       -\frac{1}{\hat{\beta}}\nabla_{||}\phi - \eta\frac{1}{\hat{\beta}} j_{||}

with :math:`\phi` and :math:`j_{||}` given by

.. math::

   U =& \frac{1}{B}\nabla_\perp^2\phi \\ j_{||} =& -\nabla_\perp^2 A_{||}

First create the variables which are going to be evolved, ensure
they’re communicated::

    class TwoField : public PhysicsModel {
      private:
      Field3D U, Apar; // Evolving variables

      int init(bool restarting) override {

        SOLVE_FOR(U, Apar);
      }

      int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
        mesh->communicate(U, Apar);
      }
    };

In order to calculate the time derivatives, we need the auxiliary
variables :math:`\phi` and :math:`j_{||}`. Calculating :math:`j_{||}`
from :math:`A_{||}` is a straightforward differential operation, but
getting :math:`\phi` from :math:`U` means inverting a Laplacian.

::

    Field3D U, Apar;
    Field3D phi, jpar; // Auxilliary variables

    int init(bool restarting) override {
      SOLVE_FOR(U, Apar);
      SAVE_REPEAT(phi, jpar); // Save variables in output file
      return 0;
    }

    int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
      phi = invert_laplace(mesh->Bxy*U, phi_flags); // Solve for phi
      mesh->communicate(U, Apar, phi);  // Communicate phi
      jpar = -Delp2(Apar);     // Calculate jpar
      mesh->communicate(jpar); // Communicate jpar
      return 0;
    }

Note that the Laplacian inversion code takes care of boundary regions,
so ``U`` doesn’t need to be communicated first. The differential
operator ``Delp2`` , like all differential operators, needs the values
in the guard cells and so ``Apar`` needs to be communicated before
calculating ``jpar`` . Since we will need to take derivatives of
``jpar`` later, this needs to be communicated as well.

::

    int rhs(BoutReal t) override {
      ...
      mesh->communicate(jpar);

      ddt(U) = -b0xGrad_dot_Grad(phi, U) + SQ(mesh->Bxy)*Grad_par(Jpar / mesh->Bxy)
      ddt(Apar) = -Grad_par(phi) / beta_hat - eta*jpar / beta_hat; }

.. _sec-logging:

Logging output
--------------

Logging should be used to report simulation progress, record
information, and warn about potential problems. BOUT++ includes a
simple logging facility which supports both C printf and C++ iostream
styles. For example::

   output.write("This is an integer: %d, and this a real: %e\n", 5, 2.0)

   output << "This is an integer: " << 5 << ", and this a real: " << 2.0 << endl;

Messages sent to ``output`` on processor 0 will be printed to console
and saved to ``BOUT.log.0``. Messages from all other processors will
only go to their log files, ``BOUT.log.#`` where ``#`` is the
processor number.

**Note**: If an error occurs on a processor other than processor 0,
then the error message will usually only be in the log file, not
printed to console. If BOUT++ crashes but no error message is printed,
try looking at the ends of all log files:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ tail BOUT.log.*


For finer control over which messages are printed, several outputs are
available, listed in the table below.

===================   =================================================================
Name                  Useage
===================   =================================================================
``output_debug``      For highly verbose output messages, that are normally not needed.
                      Needs to be enabled with a compile switch
``output_info``       For infos like what options are used
``output_progress``   For infos about the current progress
``output_warn``       For warnings
``output_error``      For errors
===================   =================================================================


Controlling logging level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default all of the outputs except ``output_debug`` are saved to log
and printed to console (processor 0 only).

To reduce the volume of outputs the command line argument ``-q``
(quiet) reduces the output level by one, and ``-v`` (verbose)
increases it by one. Running with ``-q`` in the command line arguments
suppresses the ``output_info`` messages, so that they will not appear
in the console or log file. Running with ``-q -q`` suppresses
everything except ``output_warn`` and ``output_error``.

To enable the ``output_debug`` messages, first configure BOUT++ with
debug messages enabled by adding ``-DDEBUG_ENABLED`` to ``BOUT_FLAGS``
in ``make.config`` and then recompiling with ``make clean;
make``. When running BOUT++ add a "-v" flag to see ``output_debug``
messages.

.. _sec-3to4:

Updating Physics Models from v3 to v4
-------------------------------------

Version 4.0.0 of BOUT++ introduced several features which break
backwards compatibility. If you already have physics models, you will
most likely need to update them to work with version 4. The main
breaking changes which you are likely to come across are:

* Using round brackets ``()`` instead of square brackets ``[]`` for
  indexing fields

* Moving components of `Mesh` related to the metric tensor and "real
  space" out into a new object, `Coordinates`

* Changed some `Field3D` member functions into non-member functions

* The shifted metric method has changed in version 4, so that fields
  are stored in orthogonal X-Z coordinates rather than field aligned
  coordinates.  This has implications for boundary conditions and
  post-processing. See :ref:`sec-parallel-transforms` for more
  information.

A new tool is provided, ``bin/bout_3to4.py``, which can identify these
changes, and fix most of them automatically. Simply run this program
on your physic model to see how to update it to work with version 4:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ${BOUT_TOP}/bin/bout_3to4.py my_model.cxx

The output of this command will show you how to fix each problem it
identifies. To automatically apply them, you can use the ``--replace``
option:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ${BOUT_TOP}/bin/bout_3to4.py --replace my_model.cxx

Also in version 4 is a new syntax for looping over each point in a
field. See :ref:`sec-iterating` for more information.


.. _sec-examples:

More examples
-------------

The code and input files in the ``examples/`` subdirectory are for
research, demonstrating BOUT++, and to check for broken functionality.
Some proper unit tests have been implemented, but this is something
which needs improving. The examples which were published in
[Dudson2009]_ were ``drift-instability``, ``interchange-instability``
and ``orszag-tang``.

.. [Dudson2009] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2009.03.008


advect1d
~~~~~~~~

The model in ``gas_compress.cxx`` solves the compressible gas dynamics
equations for the density :math:`n`, velocity :math:`\mathbf{V}`, and
pressure :math:`P`:

drift-instability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The physics code ``2fluid.cxx`` implements a set of reduced Braginskii
2-fluid equations, similar to those solved by the original BOUT code.
This evolves 6 variables: Density, electron and ion temperatures,
parallel ion velocity, parallel current density and vorticity.

Input grid files are the same as the original BOUT code, but the output
format is different.


interchange-instability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. figure:: ../figs/interchange_inst_test.*
   :alt: Interchange instability test

   Interchange instability test. Solid lines are from analytic theory,
   symbols from BOUT++ simulations, and the RMS density is averaged
   over :math:`z`. Vertical dashed line marks the reference point,
   where analytic and simulation results are set equal


sod-shock
~~~~~~~~~

.. figure:: ../figs/sod_result.*
   :alt: Sod shock-tube problem for testing shock-handling methods
   :width: 48.0%

   Sod shock-tube problem for testing shock-handling methods
