manual/sphinx/_apidoc/boutdata.rst, before:

boutdata package
================

Module contents
---------------

.. automodule:: boutdata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Submodules
----------

boutdata\.cbdtoeqdsk module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.cbdtoeqdsk
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.collect module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.collect
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.data module
---------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.data
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.gen\_surface module
-----------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.gen_surface
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.griddata module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.griddata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.input module
----------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.input
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.mayavi2 module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.mayavi2
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.mms module
--------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.mms
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.pol\_slice module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.pol_slice
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.restart module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.restart
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.settings module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.settings
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.shiftz module
-----------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.shiftz
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Commit message:

Use Python as default language for Python API docs

manual/sphinx/_apidoc/boutdata.rst, after:

.. Use python as the default language for syntax highlighting in this file
.. highlight:: python

boutdata package
================

Module contents
---------------

.. automodule:: boutdata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Submodules
----------

boutdata\.cbdtoeqdsk module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.cbdtoeqdsk
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.collect module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.collect
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.data module
---------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.data
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.gen\_surface module
-----------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.gen_surface
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.griddata module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.griddata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.input module
----------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.input
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.mayavi2 module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.mayavi2
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.mms module
--------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.mms
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.pol\_slice module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.pol_slice
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.restart module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.restart
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.settings module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.settings
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boutdata\.shiftz module
-----------------------

.. automodule:: boutdata.shiftz
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
