manual/sphinx/_apidoc/boututils.rst, before:

boututils package
=================

Module contents
---------------

.. automodule:: boututils
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Submodules
----------

boututils\.analyse\_equil\_2 module
-----------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.analyse_equil_2
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.anim module
----------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.anim
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.ask module
---------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.ask
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.boutgrid module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.boutgrid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.boutwarnings module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.boutwarnings
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.calculus module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.calculus
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.closest\_line module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.closest_line
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.contour module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.contour
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.crosslines module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.crosslines
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.datafile module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.datafile
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.efit\_analyzer module
--------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.efit_analyzer
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.fft\_deriv module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.fft_deriv
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.fft\_integrate module
--------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.fft_integrate
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.file\_import module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.file_import
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.geqdsk module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.geqdsk
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.idl\_tabulate module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.idl_tabulate
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.int\_func module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.int_func
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.linear\_regression module
------------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.linear_regression
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.local\_min\_max module
---------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.local_min_max
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.mode\_structure module
---------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.mode_structure
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.moment\_xyzt module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.moment_xyzt
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.options module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.options
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.plotdata module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.plotdata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.plotpolslice module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.plotpolslice
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.radial\_grid module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.radial_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.read\_geqdsk module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.read_geqdsk
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.run\_wrapper module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.run_wrapper
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.showdata module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.showdata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.spectrogram module
-----------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.spectrogram
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.surface\_average module
----------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.surface_average
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.volume\_integral module
----------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.volume_integral
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.watch module
-----------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.watch
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Commit message:

Use Python as default language for Python API docs

manual/sphinx/_apidoc/boututils.rst, after:

.. Use python as the default language for syntax highlighting in this file
.. highlight:: python

boututils package
=================

Module contents
---------------

.. automodule:: boututils
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Submodules
----------

boututils\.analyse\_equil\_2 module
-----------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.analyse_equil_2
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.anim module
----------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.anim
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.ask module
---------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.ask
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.boutgrid module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.boutgrid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.boutwarnings module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.boutwarnings
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.calculus module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.calculus
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.closest\_line module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.closest_line
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.contour module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.contour
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.crosslines module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.crosslines
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.datafile module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.datafile
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.efit\_analyzer module
--------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.efit_analyzer
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.fft\_deriv module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.fft_deriv
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.fft\_integrate module
--------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.fft_integrate
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.file\_import module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.file_import
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.geqdsk module
------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.geqdsk
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.idl\_tabulate module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.idl_tabulate
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.int\_func module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.int_func
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.linear\_regression module
------------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.linear_regression
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.local\_min\_max module
---------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.local_min_max
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.mode\_structure module
---------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.mode_structure
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.moment\_xyzt module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.moment_xyzt
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.options module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.options
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.plotdata module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.plotdata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.plotpolslice module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.plotpolslice
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.radial\_grid module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.radial_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.read\_geqdsk module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.read_geqdsk
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.run\_wrapper module
------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.run_wrapper
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.showdata module
--------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.showdata
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.spectrogram module
-----------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.spectrogram
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.surface\_average module
----------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.surface_average
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.volume\_integral module
----------------------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.volume_integral
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

boututils\.watch module
-----------------------

.. automodule:: boututils.watch
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
