manual/sphinx/_apidoc/zoidberg.rst, before:

zoidberg package
================

Module contents
---------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Submodules
----------

zoidberg\.boundary module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.boundary
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.field module
----------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.field
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.fieldtracer module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.fieldtracer
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.grid module
---------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.plot module
---------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.plot
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.poloidal\_grid module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.poloidal_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.progress module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.progress
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.rzline module
-----------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.rzline
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_field module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_field
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_fieldtracer module
----------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_fieldtracer
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_grid module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_poloidal\_grid module
-------------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_poloidal_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_rzline module
-----------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_rzline
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_zoidberg module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_zoidberg
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.zoidberg module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.zoidberg
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Commit message:

Use Python as default language for Python API docs

manual/sphinx/_apidoc/zoidberg.rst, after:

.. Use python as the default language for syntax highlighting in this file
.. highlight:: python

zoidberg package
================

Module contents
---------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

Submodules
----------

zoidberg\.boundary module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.boundary
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.field module
----------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.field
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.fieldtracer module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.fieldtracer
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.grid module
---------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.plot module
---------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.plot
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.poloidal\_grid module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.poloidal_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.progress module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.progress
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.rzline module
-----------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.rzline
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_field module
----------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_field
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_fieldtracer module
----------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_fieldtracer
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_grid module
---------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_poloidal\_grid module
-------------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_poloidal_grid
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_rzline module
-----------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_rzline
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.test\_zoidberg module
-------------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.test_zoidberg
    :members:
    :undoc-members:

zoidberg\.zoidberg module
-------------------------

.. automodule:: zoidberg.zoidberg
    :members:
    :undoc-members:
